---
layout: post
title: "The Art of Obsession: !!Con 2014"
published: true
talks: true
---
#
#
### The Art of Obsession: !!Con 2014


*This is the video and unedited text of my keynote talk at <a href="http://bangbangcon.com/">!!Con</a> 2014 in NYC. The <a href="https://speakerdeck.com/mrb/the-art-of-obsession">slides can be found here</a>. Transcription provided by the <a href="http://stenoknight.com/">awesome Mirabai Knight</a> - hire them for your next conference!*

<center><iframe width="560" height="315" src="//www.youtube.com/embed/yJgwrk6_zGY" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe></center>

#  
### Transcript

All right. Allow me to... Uh... Bet
on this working. All right. No? Oh!
There we go. Okay. All right. Let's see.
This works. I'm pretty loud, so...
What's that? For the screen? That's
exciting for me. Is it accurate? Cool. I
have bad hearing, and so... That's
really cool to see that. All right.
Anyway, I'll get started. So... This is
a photograph of a really special person
who I'd like to introduce you to today.
How many people know who this person is?
Okay. A few of you? Cool. So this is
Harry Smith. I first saw this photograph
when I was a teenager. About 14 or 15
years old. And I was at my friend's house. And the thing about this
photograph is that it was in a book of
photographs by Allen Ginsberg, who was
my favorite poet at the time. I fancied
myself a bit of a poet when I was a
teenager, as many of you did and I'm
sure still do. So it was a really
interesting photograph. I had no idea
who this individual was. And the caption
is really funny. It says Harry Smith,
painter, archivist, anthropologist,
filmmaker, hermetic alchemist,
transforming milk into milk. So I had to
know -- who was he? I did a bit more
digging. Found a photograph of him when
he was younger. He had some interesting
things going on earlier in his life as
well. You can tell from that smile he
has a lot of knowledge in his head. So
it took me a long time to figure out
information about him, because at that
time, it was just a little bit more
challenging to figure out not only basic
facts about an individual, but to get
your hands on the media was particularly
challenging. So it turns out that he was
all those things that Ginsberg said he
was and a lot more. He was an
anthropologist by trade, a linguist, a
translator, a painter, and perhaps most
of all, a collector, a very obsessive
collector. I'm going to read you a quote
about him. This quote and a lot of the
images in this presentation are in part
due to the good work of the Getty
Research Institute, part of the Getty
Museum in Los Angeles. So they preserved
a lot of photographs about him and did
research about him and read about him.
You're all reading the quote on the
screen. Harry Smith liked to look for
keys to the universal patterns that
shape our cultures and the hidden realms
of the human unconscious. He compared
patterns in Native American music with
the eccentric rhythms of jazz, the
patterns in Seminole patchwork with
Ukrainian Easter eggs, the  (on
screen)... Sounds pretty cool, right? He
was a collector. So I'm going to show
you... I'm not going to tell you so much
anymore. I'm going to show you the
things he collected. Tell you a little
bit about them, but show you too. And
perhaps most famously, he's a Grammy
award winning ethnomusicologist. He
collected sounds and also recorded sound
himself. Some of the recorded sounds he
collected he presented in this 1952 epic
release three double albums with
booklets, called the anthology of
American folk music, from the mid20s to
the early 30 s, and released them --
songs, social music, and ballads. He
released in 1952 after collecting it for
a long time, and you can imagine that in
the '40s and '50s, collecting records
wasn't really a thing. These were not
artifacts that people cared about. No
one thought you would want to keep them
around or had any idea that this music
would be lost, along with the media. So
the fact that he decided to collect and
document them in that anthropological
way was important, because he ended up
influencing quite a lot of people by
releasing this music that would
otherwise have been lost to history.
Including Joan Baez, a well known folk
singer in these parts named Bob Dylan,
who was not only influenced by this
music. He covered some of these songs
and used a lot of them in this music.
And it influenced a personal favorite
musician of mine, less well known, but
equally brilliant. Named John Fahey. An
American guitar player who took Smith's
direction a little bit even further. And
here's another interesting story for a
musical project he worked on. In 1954,
Smith was held for a week in the
Anadarko, Oklahoma jail, on suspicion of
stealing guns, and there he met several
Kiowa Indians who introduced him (on
screen) he returned to record them,
because he heard the music and liked it,
and he decided to set up his equipment
in singers' homes or his hotel room,
rather than at the actual ceremony.
Because he wanted to get commentary. And
he was worried about mixing taking
peyote and faithfully recording these
rituals, which you can imagine might be
challenging. Here's the picture of that.
It's called the Kiowa peyote meeting and
it shows a range of his interests. He
published it on the same record label 20
years after he published the anthology
of American folk music, and it shows the
range of his interests and the rigor of
how he was capable of applying his means
of collecting to a variety of
different genres of music. But he also
collected a lot of other things, like
eggshells on toilet paper rolls. You
can't really see that. There's not a lot
of light. When you see the slides later
-- it's literally a box full of
eggshells on toilet paper rolls. He
collected gourds. These are the boxes
from the Getty Museum collection of his
collections. Tarot decks, he was into
the occult and esoteric knowledge, and
one of his other collections was paper
airplanes. He collected so many paper
airplanes that he donated them to the
Smithsonian Air and Space Museum, and
they had them there for a long time. Now
they're at the Getty. But the thing
about the way he collected them was
fascinating. He collected for years and
years found paper airplanes. He lived in
New York and he would walk all over the
place and ended up finding a lot of
paper airplanes. You never know what
you're going to find if you're not
looking for it. So I'm going to show you
some of them. They hold fascinating
cultural meaning, because as you see,
the airplanes that he finds reflect
components of the culture that they were
found in. Like this one from 1967...
That's on a flyer entitled many smokes
and spring seasonings, published by the
organization to end the war in Vietnam.
Or this from the cafe Agogo. Published
by the American Folkways in 1967.
Demonstrate against the war, the Vietnam
peace parade committee. Here's a paper
airplane made from that flyer, a flyer
from the Empire State Building. People
used to like to fold them up on the top
of the Empire State Building and throw
them off and he would find them
somewhere. A 1978 menu from Max's Kansas
City, inscribed with the word Excelsior
over and over again, and here's a page
from a child's connect the dots book.
Whatever you want to call it. So besides
paper airplanes, he loved string
figures. He was really interested in
string figures. Here's an awesome
picture of him with some string figures.
It's really... You know, very photogenic
individual. So here's him, recreating a
string figure of some kind. Here's a
sketch that he made. Of a string figure
from an unpublished manuscript on string
figures that was left behind when he
died. So he collected string figures,
which is an interesting thing to
collect. How do you collect them? Right?
They're an ephemeral thing, but they're
a reproducible form, because you can
compose them. You can start with a
string of a known dimension and perform
certain operations on them and then end
up with that string. Right? And so he
did that. And so here are some
photographs of the ones that he placed,
and he would see someone making it,
write it down, reproduce it, and
photograph it.

And they look really cool. So much so
that a gallery in 2012 in Brooklyn did a
recreation of some of the facsimiles of
his books. So they're really cool. So
besides all the other things he
collected -- images. He was a really
famous painter, but also a really well
known experimental filmmaker. He wound
up in the Bay Area in the 50s, becoming
a very well known avant garde filmmaker.
Made perhaps one of the most beautiful
and difficult abstract films of all
time, called film number 18, also called
mahogany. A very challenging film to
project, a very challenging film to
watch, very long, very abstract, but
shows that he was a collector and a
composer. So he used a lot of collected,
found imagery. He would find film reels,
he would record everyday life, and he
would compose it into these grand
collages, that were meant to invoke, you
know, this idea of universal
consciousness that he was so desperately
seeking.

Here's a couple more stills. This one is
more indicative of his abstract work. So
he also collected... A lot of other
things. Books. Pop-up books, beaded
costumes, things shaped like other
things. Including spoons shaped like
ducts, banks shaped like apples, and
anything shaped like a hamburger. So I
think we can all agree that Harry Smith
was a master of obsession. Which is why
I jumped right into telling you this
story. This talk is called the art of
obsession. My name is Michael Bernstein.
This is !!Con. I'm really excited to be
here. Thanks for having me. It's an
honor. This is the requisite title
slide. This is my first keynote talk, if
you can't tell, and that's enough about
me. Let's get back to the subject. So
why did I tell you his story? Because
I'm interested in the following
questions and I wanted an excuse to ask
them to you. Because you're such a room
full of beautiful and intelligent
people. So what can we learn from
Smith's techniques? That's one thing
that I wanted to ask you. He found
satisfaction in knowledge, in the
intersection between his interests.
Right? So it wasn't that he liked music,
and he liked film and he liked paper
airplanes and he liked string figures.
Right? He liked connections between
things. He liked knowledge. And he
really... He liked life. Life wasn't
always so kind to him, but he really
liked it, and he wanted to experience it
to the fullest. So paper airplanes were
interesting, because of the stories they
told as a whole. Each of them is an
interesting artifact. Right? They're
cool, but if I said he collected a paper
airplane, that would hardly be as
fascinating as the fact that he
collected so many over such a long
period of time, in so many different
places. And he actually sat and thought
about what that meant. Why did people
make them? What did finding them mean?
What can you... What could you read from
a map of reconstructed locations of
found paper airplanes over space and
time?

So paintings, songs, things that look
like other things. They all communicate
ideas. They're more than the substance
that composes them. So that's one
question. Another one is: how can we
master this art of obsession? And why do
we want to? It's summed up to me by this
quote that we saw from the Getty. I love
the writing that they did about his
work. So I'm going to read the same
quote twice. Harry Smith liked to look
for keys to the universal patterns that
shape our cultures and the hidden realms
of the human unconscious. Keys to
universal patterns. This is the -- I
really like this phrase the best. From
the work about him. So we can master the
art of obsession by looking for these
keys. That's my thesis. And the
universal patterns are -- since
universal patterns are composed of
connections, I have a connection that
I'd like to share. Which is that since
string figures and knots were some of
Smith's favorite things, that's a really
interesting thing to me. He believed
that they held some secrets to universal
understanding. Knot tying can be found
in many cultures, but not others, and
there was a connection in Smith's mind
between -- you know, how cultures and
societies communicated with each other
through written and spoken language and
what kind of knot tying culture they
had. He believed that they worked
similarly to how the brain understood
written numbers and letters. So Smith
was really into knots. And also computer
scientists and mathematicians are also
really into knots. This was a figure
from a book about ternary writing, and
this picture that's shown here has
parallels to parallel execution and term
rewriting. So you can look at this knot
untying as a complex term that can be
normalized to a specific value. And this
connection is really deep and
interesting to me. And it made me think
that...knots are programs. And they
signal -- what is interesting about
computation. Because computation is more
than how computers work. Computation --
our understanding of computation
influences how we understand nature the
world around us, influences how we live
and communicate, and it's one of the
deepest human achievements,
intellectually, that we've ever
achieved. The achievements. You achieve
them. That's how you get them. That's
how they become achievements. So since
knots are programs, that leads me to
believe that Harry Smith would have
loved computer science. It has universal
application. It gets to the heart of so
many human problems. Even though we
don't always talk about it in the most
humane terms. It has its own codes, its
own languages, it's very esoteric in its
own way, and it can be applied in a
variety of contexts that are not
immediately obvious by looking at it on
the surface. And so if Harry Smith had
some advice for us, he would have told
us to get obsessed. If we want to learn
more about computer science and
understand it better, we should probably
get really into it, and get obsessed in
the way he did, by looking at the
connections. Looking for connections
between things. Because obsession is
crucial to interdisciplinary thinking.
If you want to understand one thing
deeply, and you have your eyes open, and
are available to -- making connections
between the thing that you're studying
and the world around you, then you can
get a lot further, and Smith
demonstrated this, in my mind. And the
reason we want to think
interdisciplinarily is because
interdisciplinary thinking is crucial to
advancement. The biggest, most radical
achievements within the world of
computer science, in my opinion, are
those that have made connections to
other disciplines and have leveraged
other lessons from those other
disciplines, and people that are aware
of the world around them can make big,
radical changes, in the way that we
think about things, even as deep as
computation. So there's so many
possibilities, when it comes to
computers and computer science. There's
a lot of starting points for
exploration. Things that you can get
obsessed with. It's very fractal in
nature, as it's often said. You keep
studying and studying and studying, and
you look at what you're studying and you
realize... Wow, this looks a lot like
what I think I was studying three months
ago, and I'm studying the same thing,
but it's somehow different. How am I
solving the same problem over and over
again? You're in a knot or something
like that. If I was a skilled speaker, I
would have a knot analogy now too, but I
don't. So what kind of things with
computers should we get obsessed with? I
really like compilers. They're my
favorite type of program lately. I think
that compilers are... Compilers are the
mahogany, film number 18, of computer
science. You know? They're so amazing.
They do everything. We... People spend a
lot of time thinking about them, talking
about them. If you want to teach me
about how to write a compiler, you
can... I'd love to chat with you after
this talk. I like type systems a lot
lately too. They get to the heart of how
we express programs. There are these
running programs that tell us
information about our programs. They
tell us what we can and what we cannot
express. And they're there, whether we
want them to be or not. It's sort of
this funny thing, that you can program
in one so-called paradigm and be
influenced by this idea that you can
choose to acknowledge it or not. And
it's still sort of, to a certain extent
-- influences what you're capable of
expressing, in your language of choice.
I'm absolutely fascinated by them, and I
think they're one of the deepest...
They're clearly one of the deepest
connections that we have between
computer science and mathematics and
logic, for one thing. So I think that
Harry Smith probably would have gotten a
really big kick out of the idea that
programs are really connected to this
1920s logic technology. He probably
would have said told you so, or
something like that. Static analysis is
cool. It's also my day job. But programs
that analyze other programs are really
interesting to think about. Right? Talk
about the connections between things. So
I want to write my... I'm going to write
a program in one language that tells you
information about the program that you
wrote in another language, because in
the language that I'm writing in, it's
good for telling you things about your
programs, but I wouldn't want to write
the kinds of programs that you write in
the language that you write them in. Or
something. So that's a lot. That's a big
bag, that I would be careful before I
open that one up, if I were you. Logic
programming is really cool. You can
solve problems that you didn't know you
have.

And in understanding and learning how to
use logic programming, you can shatter
your narrow paradigm world views. I have
a lot of exclamation points in my notes.
Just my... Title was lacking one, so I
felt like I needed to make up for them.
I'm not speaking in a very exclamatory
way right now, but they're there. I
spoke a lot and thought a lot about
distributed systems and they're also
cool and they're also one of those
fractal problems. The same problems that
you have quote-unquote locally appear in
a distributed way in a really different
and interesting -- the properties
slightly change, in other words. Things
look different when you see them from
afar, and then you stare at them for a
while, and they kind of look the same,
but not quite. That's what abstraction
is, I guess. So you should study them.
The world is already distributed. It's
time to catch up. Exclamation point.
Programming language theory. It
encompasses a lot of other things.
Programming language theorists and type
theorists have this cool ability to
somehow talk about philosophy. But now
you're in the context of computer
science. Right? So when you're thinking
about how we express the... How we
interact with... What is our interface
to computation, and to computers? It's
through these languages. Right? So
they're clearly very powerful. And
they... And it's well known that the
language that you use influences what
you can express. Right? That's sort of a
given. But it also influences how you
think about computation in general. So
if you speak enough in a certain
language and you think you can
communicate certain things, you write
enough programs in a certain programming
language, and it influences how you
think for a long time. You know, I
learned very... I've learned very
uninteresting things when I was learning
how computer programming worked. I wish
that I had learned other paradigms
first, because then I would not have
such a broken brain right now. But
anyway... Yeah. How you learn really
influences what you think. And
programming language theory encompasses
a lot of that. So how do you learn all
of those things?

How do you get obsessed, and stay
obsessed? How do you understand these
subjects in a way that will lead you to
find the types of connections that Smith
made and was so good at making? So
here's a little bit of advice on my take
on that. This is my impractical guide to
the art of obsession. So the first piece
of advice is to follow the links. So
find a resource. Look for the influences
and connections between these resources
and disciplines. Here's a metaphor for
that. Your favorite band, growing up,
liked music that you thought was
terrible. Right? So I have a really
funny story. How many people like the
band Black Flag? You guys like punk rock
music? Hardcore music? You know who they
are, at least? If you don't, that's
okay. They're a really famous band, and
they were really tough. They were from
California. And they thought that they
were really cool. They were. They were
really cool. The lead guitarist had a
dirty secret, though. He loved the
Grateful Dead. They were his favorite
band. He wore Grateful Dead T-shirts and
people thought that he was kidding. So
these punks would beat up hippies and
would be wearing Black Flag T-shirts
while they were doing so. So the idea
there is that... It's not enough to
learn what your influencers teach you.
Right? You need to look back at what
influenced them. In order to understand
how they arrived at that conclusion.
That's a fundamental component to
understanding how the world works. How
computation works. And in order to make
those connections, you have to be
willing to step further than what's
obvious. And out of your comfort zone.

Because I love the Grateful Dead and
Black Flag a lot. They're both really
great. Yeah. Cool. I'm glad I got to
tell that story. So open your eyes. Be
open to connections to your interests
and unlikely places. This kind of goes
with that. Like, not only... You know,
when you're doing something completely
different, be open to the idea that you
might learn something about what you're
not expecting to learn about. I've
gotten a lot out of that, and I think
Smith did too. He heard things in -- you
know, he saw patterns in Ukrainian
Easter eggs that were also present in...
You know, whatever other beaded things
that he was studying. So... I missed it
from the quote, but you get my idea, I
hope. Pursue discomfort.

Regularly consult texts and concepts
that are too hard for you. You know,
pick it up. Don't be afraid. You know,
if it's a heavy book, the worst that
will happen is that you'll drop it on
your foot. And it won't get damaged,
though, because it's a really big book.
Your foot will also heal. Pick up that
book and just look at what the shape of
those things are that are too hard for
you, and, like, stare at the page that's
impossible for you to understand. And
remember that feeling. Because then when
you study, and you get past that, and
you squash it, right, you know, you
squash that discomfort, and you learn,
then you get to feel really good. Right?
You're like... Ha-ha! I remember when
this looked like absolute gibberish to
me, and now I'm talking about it on
Twitter like I'm an authority.

So... Over time, watch them become
understandable as you work hard and
learn. Trust yourself, because you're
awesome. Exclamation point. You know, if
you don't trust yourself, and you're
lucky enough to have other people that
trust you, you'll probably still be
okay, but if you really want to get as
far as you can, you need to be the one
to convince yourself that you're doing
the right thing, and it's okay to do the
wrong thing. You'll do many more wrong
things than right things. If you follow
Harry Smith's example, especially.

Contact your heroes. This is a good one.
Because they want to teach and learn
also. You know, they have things to
learn from you. Whatever you've done in
your life is definitely not the same as
whatever your hero has done. Right? You
think about individuals that accomplish
things as somehow projections of those
things that they've accomplished, but
actually, they're just bags of meat.
Like you are. And they want to be
friends with you and talk to you, most
likely. And if they don't, then that's
their loss, not yours. You have as much
to teach as you have to learn. And
that's a really important thing to
remember. People want to know what you
think about the work that they've done.
That's why they do it.

Whether they want to admit it or not.
I've had a lot of awesome experiences,
particularly in the world of academic
computer science, where, as an outsider,
I just write something, and then guess
what? The author finds it. Because they
Google themselves. You know? And they're
like... I'm going to Google this paper
that I wrote. And see who's... See what
the pundits have to say about it.
Pundit. And it feels really good.
They're like -- hey, thanks for reading
my paper. I'm like yo, thanks for
writing that paper. That was cool. What
other papers have you written? What
other books should I read? That kind of
thing. And forget what is practical.
It's important to pursue concepts past
the point of simple applicability. Don't
just learn the thing and then use it and
walk away from it. Once you've learned
it or at least a part of it, you're in a
pretty good position to -- I don't know,
understand how it was made, why it was
made that way, make your own decisions
about how that thing should have been
made, make it yourself, never use it
again. Talk about it on Twitter.
Whatever.

And then remember what is practical.
Because it's good to ship software too,
and to do things. As opposed to talking
about them all the time. You can...
Yeah. I'm going to stand by that. You
should also do things. Don't just talk
about them. It's really good. Doing
things feels great. I've done it a
couple times. So... Yeah. And then in
the end, I guess the advice is to be at
least a little bit more like Harry.
Don't be too much like him. He
disregarded his life and his physical
form more than I would want for any of
you. So... Embrace the world around you,
and learn. Get obsessed, and that's it.
Thank you.

(applause)
